many people believe that humans are born
to die and that even if we could extend
human life we shouldn't I hate that idea
and believe that thanks to AI we are on
the brink of a biotech Revolution that
will radically extend human life to help
us explore this Frontier I bring you
today's guest a scientist and
entrepreneur who believes that at a
minimum AI is going to dramatically
alter Health span and that will have
thrilling consequences as long as we
don't mess it up that in mind I bring
you Dr Mamud Khan
given the fact that most men lead lives
of quiet desperation why should anybody
care about extending their
life well let's uh let's think about it
from a society point of view and an
individual point of view
okay from a society
perspective if we can keep the majority
of people functional and health and I'm
going to distinguish between what we
think about as healthy versus
independently function fun active
contributors to society and their family
and their loved ones if we can do that
Society should care the GDP impact is
calculated by Andrew Scott a professor
at London Business School and Oxford
University in England and others whove
verified this data have shown that the
impact in the US in terms of GDP is
around1 to4 trillion dollar of GDP
impact just for a 12-month extension of
healthy life not maximum life they just
keeping us healthy so Society absolutely
should care Medicare UK NHS any of these
organizations cannot currently afford
the health care costs of just providing
Health Care to people as they age it's
not possible today we haven't figured
out the solution well the Sol the
alternative is just keep people healthy
they have not only less need for chronic
care but they continue to contribute now
at an individual level most people I
talk to and there been lots of surveys
done people want to remain independent
active and health not defined by a
20-year-old if you ask somebody 20 what
is healthy and you ask somebody who's 40
or 60 what they mean by healthy most
60-year-olds will say hey can I continue
to be active can I have the mental
capacity and physical capacity to be
independent and can I contribute
professionally or personally in a
meaningful way that's one aspect of what
is being quote a healthy lifestyle
right most people care that's what they
want people don't want to live longer if
you ask them the question do you want to
live as long as possible and in their
mind that's 30 years spent in a nursing
home nobody that I know wants that very
important distinction no doubt now I
look at the moment that we're in right
now as an incredibly disruptive moment
there certainly as somebody that lives
in the US you can feel the tension
rationing up you can feel the sense of
divide and when you look at what things
exacerbate that anything that is going
to negatively impact the economy is just
going to put you in a really precarious
position when we look at what's going on
in terms of government spending and the
the pyramid that's about to flip upside
down where we go from most people are
young to most people are old and there
are fewer young people that take care of
them when I look at the problem
currently of an aging population where
health
is not taken into consideration and it's
just lifespan and now we're spending
just gobs of money on supporting people
from a health care perspective um are we
doomed if we don't Rectify this
situation and get those health care
costs under
control well I wouldn't use the word
doomed however I would ask ourselves
what are the options we
have those are challeng alling if we do
you know no action is a decision and if
we don't take any action in business as
usual we've seen what's happened the
last 20 30 years exactly as you point
there are economic challenges now
there's labor shortages on top of that
and developed countries where the birth
rate has dramatically
Fallen the life expectancy over the last
60 7 years has been extended by at least
30 years let's say 20 years of that is
requiring significant resources from a
healthare system given that burden
societies are asking ourselves what can
we do and you know it is itself divisive
because if you're a young person in a
payforward society and developed
countries are a payforward society by
the way so are developing country just
it's not structured and so in a in a
payforward society I'm a young person
working today I'm supposed to be paying
taxes so I can take care of the last
Generation Well if there's a few of
those as you point out in that pyramid
that that's okay that's part of being
but all of a sudden if you're in China
and you're one grandchild with four
grandparents how am I supposed to
contribute to that economic model let
alone personally having to take care of
that's divisive right how am I supposed
to do that so what are the
Alternatives it's going to have to be
Innovation Innovation across the
Spectrum which means everything from
policies of how we think about our
taking care of society
down to technological breakthroughs and
I don't mean just biology the whole
spectrum of technology to allow leverage
of the fewer and fewer young people we
have as well as the ability to use fewer
people to generate more and more
activity both financially but also
Services right that's true leverage and
industrialization over the last 100
years has allowed humans to create huge
leverage in every aspect of Our Lives
what we have to ask ourselves now is
what is that next scurve of that
leverage right how can technology help
us what are the policies that will
enable that what's the financial
policies that will do that what are
societal Norms how do we how do we
enable all of this and there there's
multiple aspects of this uh not just
biology and which means something that
you do for a living we need to start
talking to people in the terms that they
understand and one of the biggest gaps
and I've been in science 40 years is
scientists can't be on their own telling
this story scientists are not good at
telling the story and what we learned in
covid is what was being said as an
expert was not what was being heard in
some cases it divided us so I would say
part of the challenge that we have to
overcome is we got to figure out how to
get people on the same page to
understand what the challenge is but
importantly also based on clear evidence
point out the opportunity and the
opportunity is huge everybody benefits
one other thing about
divisive what we have to think about is
the Hales and the Have Nots not just
within a society but across the world
every human being is aging but imagine a
world where you have technological
breakthrough which allows a population
and individuals to remain healthy longer
more productive more able to contribute
to their society all
but if the only civilians and society
that can do that are rich countries then
that economic divide between the rich
and the poor countries will continue to
widen if that happens we're going to
have increase this challenge of Haves
and Have Nots so it's very important
that we ask ourselves another question
on the assumption that we can have
technological progress and I'm pretty
confident that will happen how do we
democratize it how do we make sure that
the masses are impacted in a way that
whether you are less well off within the
United States or are financially more
capable you have access to this the only
way to do that is democratization of
Technology we used to think that some
ubiquitous dream but cell phones told us
and showed us that very expensive
technology can become ubiquitous it it
re it requ IR ired not just
technological breakthrough but
Innovation and business models and it
was Innovation and business models that
democratized cell phone technology the
poor Rickshaw driver in a Asian country
has a cell phone we would not have
imagined that possible even 20 years
ago so you talk about the opportunity
being massive what is the opportunity
exactly just extending the healthy life
expectancy so let let's take a look at
we Define retirement age let's say 60 or
65 you know this was defined as I'm sure
you know after around World War II by
European countries and the number was
picked because most people didn't live
past 60 so it a great model right well
I'm going to give I'm going to guarantee
you a government pension if you last
live past 60 well if 90% of the
population didn't do that I didn't have
to take on responsibility so guess what
70 years later our definition of
retirement age in most countries is till
60 or 65 we're assuming that after that
age you're no longer contributing in a
meaningful way and you become a net
recipient well the first thing that that
raises
is as soon as you turn 65 are you are
you now no longer contributing I would
say people are churches Charities if you
look at informal contribution to the GDP
in the United States in Europe and the
UK and many Asian countries older people
continue to serve next Generations in
countries with more formal employment
why should there be in particular when
knowledge workers are actually in high
demand because there's fewer of them so
these are the sort of links that we have
to think about and say what is it we're
extending right we're extending
Health throughout your life allowing you
to contribute through all stages of your
life then it comes down to choices I'm
not saying everybody should be working
till they're 80 because they don't have
a choice but we can choose to contribute
and everybody has a chance to contribute
in different ways whether it's taking
care of your grandparents sorry
grandchildren taking providing support
to your local church your local charity
volunteering at the local hospital or
continuing to work as an executive new
careers you and I have had more than one
career why should it be one career or
two careers or three careers why can't
it be four
careers now is society set up for that
are we as Employer set up for that I'm
going to be provocative what's the
mission of an educational institute if
it only serves you in your life until
you're
22 is that the only mission of an
educational institute maybe we have to
ask us University presidents that their
role in a society is far more than
taking teenagers and giving them college
degrees give me an example what would
you want them to
do why couldn't an engineer who was
trained in the 70s and 80s be now
retrained as a data scientist and an AI
because they won't want to be hearing so
this is my my big concern and I'm going
to I'm going to pull a dark cloud over
us for a second I by Nature I am
optimistic but reality is constantly
trying to convince me that I should be
way more
pessimistic and you said societal norms
and I think that may be the thing that
we most have to think about and when
when I think about okay people have been
raised thinking that they're going to
get to retire at 65 that they can then
put their hand out they have an
expectation that somebody's going to
look after
them that like you said works when
you've got a ton of people under you and
most people have died by then you're one
of the lucky few that's alive it does
not work when you're super topheavy and
that is a position that we're running
towards and I feel like everybody has a
sort of generic sense of either AI is
going to save us robots are going to
save us uh magically we I mean coming
from a US perspective we'll be able to
print our way out of it and just give
print money uh and be able to give money
away and everything's going to be great
and the reality is I think that people
are going to have to fundamentally shift
their perspective but historically
especially when debt gets involved the
only time that people shift their
perspective is when there is literal
Bloodshed and so I find that deeply
distressing and so when I think about
how do we how do we migrate people to
the real opportunity where so I am very
hopeful that not only can we extend
healthspan but we can extend lifespan I
don't want to I don't want to believe uh
that we're stuck at 120 I know we don't
have evidence yet so I won't I won't
back you into the corner of of uh
telling me that it is possible
but all of that is such a radical
transformation that even if we just
isolate it to the pyramid is going to
flip we are demographics they're set
there's no way to suddenly have a lot
more
young people you can have a lot more
infants but you can't have a lot more
20-year-olds it takes 20 years to get
there so we the pyramid is going to flip
and now the question is how do we flip
that pyramid well and I think if we
don't change Cal norms and expect people
to live and work longer and contribute
more meaningfully to basically their own
caretaking their own healthare uh
contributing to GDP all of that if if we
don't figure out a way to
psychologically get people on board with
that we are going to have a real a a
catastrophe that I have not mapped out
yet to figure out exactly what that
catastrophe looks like because you have
very angry old people in fact now that I
say this out loud the the problem you
will run into is they will continue to
wield political force and now you will
get you were referring earlier to what's
known as the jinny coefficient for
people that have never heard that word
before where you get a massive divide
between rich and poor
I'm going to guess though I've not heard
of it that there's an equal
psychological principle that is
political power and if you have the old
generation wielding all the political
power you will get an uprising of young
people who just won't tolerate
it help me see a way out of this so most
of what you said were in full alignment
and agreement it's interesting because
everything you just described is not to
solve a technical problem or a
scientific ific problem but actually a
societal norm and therefore leading to
if possible policy reform but you won't
get policy reform until you get the
political clout to want to do
it to reemphasize what one of the things
you said in terms of the challenges one
of the things that I read and I'm sure
you saw this during covid people were
starting to actually write in
Publications and I remember a letter
published in London Times
actually stating why don't we let all
people die from covid instead of
shutting up society that was in the
London times so the fact that it got
published is not their opinion right in
a free press you but it tells you if
somebody's willing to write a letter in
a highly visible publication how many
people were thinking that okay so though
that's starting to be seen if that
letter is some evidence for that people
were questioning in more than one
country
quote we're being shut down just to keep
all people alive right that was Co what
is 80% of deaths occurred in all
people and so we've already witnessed
that now the question is what are the
learnings and and I'm a little bit more
optimistic simply because when we look
at rapid technological change and
embracing technology in the past
Industrial
Revolution every body was
scared all these manual workers are not
going to have any jobs guess what
happened gdps grew new professions got
created then we saw that when we started
to see agriculture start to get
industrialized agriculture was the
primary employer and guess what United
States Europe it's it's a minority
employer now so we've seen this when uh
we first started to see computers come
word processing printing the internet
yeah lots of jobs got
displaced the newspaper industry is is a
relatively minor media industry today go
back to the days of you know the the
Heyday of newspapers it's very different
media has become what you do very
powerful reaches far more people so
we've seen this and once people start to
experience the positives they start to
embrace the question really is how much
of it was forced and how much of it was
it people saw the opportunity yeah if
You' asked travel agents 20 some years
ago what do you think of the internet
you'd have got a different answer than
the
traveler so I always think how do I get
the the consumer to actually understand
the opportunity and embrace it and then
bring them along that needs to be said
then science provides a solution not the
other way around if we lead with the
scientific argument we're going to end
up in a very scary place cuz it's
misunder understood so I'm a little bit
more optimistic because I've seen there
were times I'm let me give you an
example there was a time if you go back
post World War II people used to hide a
diagnosis of
cancer there it was a taboo so if you
got diagnosed with cancer you didn't
tell anybody why because cancer was a
lethal
diagnosis if you got told cancer it's
done it's over it took a pioneering
woman who took on the cause of breast
cancer and said I am going to create
public awareness that cancer can be
conquered and the world doesn't have to
be this hiding taboo guess what the
National Institute of Health was created
as the National Cancer
Institute it took a whole movement and
over the next 40 years we found the
mechanisms of cancer and in many cases
today Cancer is treatable and curable so
what what's the analogy that getting old
is um not the terrible thing that we
once thought it was that you can be
thriving and a strong contributor as we
get older most people's mindsets the
consumer you ask tell me what it means
to get old and the first thing they
think about is the visible part of
people that might think it's onset of
dementia pain immobility rigid
they won't use those words um but all
the negatives that are associated with
the decline in function of our bodies
and Minds as we get older that's the
image so if you ask people you know that
is the inevitable
outcome that's that's what they see and
yet it is clearly evident that loss of
function at the pace that we've seen is
not ubiquitous and certainly not not to
be assumed is going to happen to
everybody in fact in the majority of
cases it is likely something that can be
slowed down if not
halted now how do you bridge that
current understanding with the technical
reality what's possible and one of the
reasons I avoid about saying we're going
to live longer although I'm I'm not
actually questioning whether we can live
past 120 or not I'm a pragmatic person
let's show that we can keep people
healthy as long as possible first and if
one of the benefits of that is that
people live longer so be it but the
primary goal right now in my mind as a
personal opinion is keeping
functionality and healthiness for as
long as possible for as many people as
possible I always add that this is not
for the benefit of a few wealthy people
this should be for everybody if we don't
do that we're going to have a true
societal
challenge you can reboot your life your
health even your career anything you
want all you need is discipline I can
teach you the tactics that I learned
while growing a billion doll business
that will allow you to see your goals
through whether you want better health
stronger relationships a more successful
career any of that is possible with the
mindset and business programs and impact
Theory University join the thousands of
students who have already accomplished
amazing things tap now for a free trial
and get started
today yeah it's very nice way of saying
that we will have revolt on our hands uh
it it does become a dystopian nightmare
very fast if people one class of people
are able to buy their way to immortality
and feeling good and all of that and the
other cannot but it's going to start
there um as you look at this landscape
as you lead people through this
landscape I think that that's going to
be one of the big challenges that you
face how do you think about that right
now in terms of um one what
breakthroughs are real what what's
happening right now and then how are we
going to make sure that that is cheap
enough that everybody will have access
to
it so first of all let's look at the
fact that there are real differences
which seem to be not just simply purely
driven by biology so if you look at the
differences in what life expectancy is a
start if you look at the United
Kingdom if you live in Glasgow versus if
you live in London the life expectancy
is at least 10 years shorter in glasow
now are you saying that's class-based
it's certainly zip Cod code based right
we know that
socioeconomic
situation which is correlated with your
postal code or zip code is an important
driver of that how much of that is
choices versus lifestyle versus the
environment you live in all those are
complex now without getting into the
biology of all of those interactions
it's clear that our human life
expectancy and maintenance of health is
Dri driven by some factors that appear
outside our own control it's a function
of where you were born and grow up on
the assumption that if you're in Glasgow
versus London or some parts of Chicago
versus another part of sugar wherever
you look there are clear
disparities those disparities are
helping us understand what are the
mechanisms driving that we can keep
populations healthy by understanding
those differences that's one Public
Health population level evidence another
we've seen is populations living in
certain parts of the world the so-called
blue zones clearly have longer life
expectancies what is the difference
there what is it about growing up in
some part of Italy or some part of
Greece or some part of the north western
part of Pakistan and India parts of
Japan all over the world there are these
blue zones what is different about those
populations and it's easy to say well
it's their lifestyle choices but there's
clearly learnings in that so that's the
human evidence now we look at animals we
have observational evidence that
different species live longer but more
importantly starting with very simple
single cell organisms which was first
shown decades ago all the way through
now to primates monkeys we've shown that
interventions
including uh therapeutic potential drugs
not approved drugs potential drugs in
some cases drugs that could be
repurposed can change the life
expectancy of otherwise randomized
matched animal groups so that's reason
to believe that this is possible now is
it safe what's the optimal way of doing
this with humans those remain to be
determined the last piece and I'll give
you an example of
this it raises the question if biologic
iCal loss of function has happened can
that decline be slowed or
reversed well if you think about the
evidence from things like epigenetic
reprogramming without getting into too
much of the technical jargon essentially
our DNA sequence our genetic code is the
same today at my age in my 60s than the
day I was born my genetic code hasn't
changed the ability of my cells to read
that code and replace themselves clearly
has changed so the question really is is
is there something wrong with my genetic
code or is there something that is I'm
losing the capability of Translating
that genetic code there's more of it
there than the genetic code because my
DNA is the same and it's all already
been shown by people like yamanaka who
got the Nobel Prize for it that you take
adult cells and you can actually change
them back to genetically flury potential
youthful cells so the code was always
there now there are animal models that
it's been shown in already in
rodents mice and now even in apes and
monkeys that you can take a dis diseased
tissue in a living animal reprogram it
cells such as in the retina and restore
function and the most powerful evidence
was on the cover page of nature from
David Sinclair's Lab at Harvard where he
took animals that lost vision from
glaucoma an age related eye disease and
restored their Vision by epigenetically
reprogramming their retinal cells that's
powerful it tells you what we used to
think was permanent loss of vision
actually to a degree now how much of it
was restored we can't measure in an
animal but we can show that it was an
animal who couldn't see light now can
see that gives us a lot of optimism
technically to figure out what's the
next step to go from we went from worms
yeast to mice to monkeys the next step
is how do we take that to humans in a
safe manner we're that
close what are the breakthroughs that
you're most excited about in longevity
you know it's a common question I get
that since we're an investment team as
well as a science funding
team if I knew the answer to that it'll
be a trillion doll answer I think there
are several both Pathways and lines of
evidence that excite my team
myself my peers in other
organizations we're actually approaching
this say where is the highest chance of
success in keeping a portfolio but I've
been in science for 40 years and one
thing I learned is you have to maintain
the
portfolio I'm of a school of thought
that I don't think it'll be a single
breakthrough some people think you know
we're going to find the pathway that
results in age related Decline and we're
going to be able to treat it
I think it's going to be different
Pathways to different levels of emphasis
and importance in different humans and
what we're going to figure out is what
they are and what combinations of those
are most active in you versus most
active in me and if I can personalize it
to that level then I'm likely to address
this and I think the simplistic view of
I'm going to find the elixir of Youth as
one molecule that we're going to put in
the water supply and suddenly
everybody's is so naive to and it
underestimates the complexity of biology
and the ability of biology to adapt
we've had a billion years of evolution
of life it has created all sorts of
intricacies we have to recognize that
aging is common to just about every
living species originating from that one
common cell a billion years ago and if
it's that
Primal then it's probably got multiple
bations over the bill billion years of
life's Evolution we need to understand
this is where Ai and the modern
Technologies where computational
capability and biology are coming
together are going to unlock some of
that it will be more nuanced and
personalized than that maybe in your
case your eyes are aging faster than
your heart in my case my heart might be
aging faster than my liver in another
person we all know people whose body has
age but their mind is sharp we know
other people whose brain is aged but
their body is Young and so we know just
from observation aging is not a single
uniform effect it's a common term for
probably a lot of very diverse processes
which manifest in people in very diverse
ways yeah I hope that gives you some
context it does I'm going to paint a
picture of the future and I want you to
tell me where I go wrong so uh when I
think about extending human life whether
we're I I'm talking primarily about the
combo of Health span and lifespan so
this is only exciting for me anyway if
we make 120 just you can count on that
and the way that you can more or less
count on getting to 65 I want to be able
to count on getting to 120 and feeling
like a million bucks okay so if I were
in your shoes and I had to start making
some bets the thing I'm going to be
going from first principles and the
thing I would want to bet on is what are
going to be the things that can identify
the patterns so my base assumption that
everything rides on top of is that the
human body is one to your point it's
individualistic so you have to be
looking at the level of the individual
but there are going to be large patterns
that you can pull out of the data so
while every human is going to be
different I will learn a lot more from
population level um data sets on humans
than I will from um mice right so AI is
going to be able to parse through all
that and instead of us taking these
rough swags that blue zones and what is
it that they have in common it's really
going to look at okay I'm going to take
let's say humans fall into 42 categories
I'm going to break the humans into 42
categories these are the chunks that
they break into these are the people
that age brain first these are the
people that age heart first whatever
these are vascular diseases petera
breaks these down into the Four Horsemen
of death he says heart disease cancer
neuro degenerative disease and type two
diabetes all right type two diabetes is
all lifestyle choices that that is a
self-made problem uh but the I disagree
on that but we'll come back really yes
I'm very eager to hear about that uh the
other three or four depending on your
take um are almost certainly just
predispositions for a weakness to aging
so okay I'm making bets number one is
going to be AI it's finding the
different patterns number two is going
to be how are we going to go about
grouping those um things whether it's
the four horsemen or something else and
then how do we actually go about
resolving those issues so so much of
this is going to be about vasculature is
my gut instinct uh and so how do we
actually go in and address those one is
going to be lifestyle so just uh whether
it's a wearable device or whatever that
tells me to eat this go to bed here
there what whatever and you remove from
me the need to think about it and to
know it just tells me what to do and I
do it um but we're also either going to
have to find a way to make people care
less about doing the things that we'll
call bad behavior so take O zic A zic as
a weight loss drug just makes you less
hungry and so you don't have the sort of
human compulsion to go eat that thing so
now you're not doing a bad behavior
that's going to cause you a problem or I
have to create something that stops the
bad behavior from being bad if that
makes sense so those would be the areas
that I would look for pattern
recognition investing in AI um probably
AI again in terms of getting down to the
individual level and sort of wearable
Technologies about what you should do
when at the individual level and then
the last stop on the train whether it's
going to be drugs or other medical
interventions actually going in at the
cellular level and making the changes so
those would be the the three three
buckets that I would be thinking about
where I'm looking for the Innovations
what's the flaw in that thinking so let
me add a fourth so there's I wouldn't
say there's a flaw in the three I think
they're all
valid come back to the choices two
diabetes yes we'll come back to that for
sure there's a
fourth and that is in the broadest and
we we can get a little bit more specific
in a minute but in the broadest
sense our only real way we measure age
today is based on your birth certificate
I look at the day you were born and I
tell you this is how old you
are it has almost no um way of
understanding even when I've
aged that these two people are of a
different age and we can all know 60y
olds that look perceptively 80 and we
know 60y olds who look 50 or 40 right so
there's a clear difference some of those
may be choices they've made over over
their
lives and uh but people have aged
differently but we don't know how to
measure in from one person to another
how do you measure age okay let alone
how do you measure it at an organ level
okay and yes there are technologies that
talk about methylation of DNA and this
and the other but to measure age in an
effective way you need to be able to
measure three things one I got to be
able to measure what your age is
today however if I can measure your
biological age today that doesn't help
me other than I'm going to tell you
something you probably already know
which I feel older than I am or I feel
younger than I am so it's a diagnostic
with little other utility perhaps
helping you intervene more in Lifestyles
more aggressively with one person or
another I don't know the second thing me
that measurement has to be able to do is
to be able to to predict for me the
gradient and the rate at which you're
aging now that's a much more powerful
measure because if I could measure your
rate of Aging when you were 30 I might
be able to tell you you're on a much
steeper slope than somebody else and
therefore you should pay attention to
this I don't have that technology today
and the third characteristic should be
able to do is it should be able to
reverse if I make the Intervention which
means I can demonstrate to you that
because of the intervention whether it's
lifestyle or it's a treatment or a
device this is predicting you're going
to live 10 years years longer that
fourth variable does not exist today
technologically until that happens we
are not going to be able to design the
clinical trials the therapeutic
protocols the clinical protocols by the
clinicians in the field to actually be
able to do something about it I'm going
to give you diabetes analogy when I was
in I'm an endocrinologist I spent my
professional career treating diabetes
and researching
diabetes if if you think about if you go
back to the 70s when I entered Medical
School hemoglobin A1c was not
available finger stick blood sugars were
not available to be able to do your own
blood sugar and even those did not
become useful until it was shown by the
diabetes control and complication trial
that A1C correlated with outcome of
complications now I had something to say
to my patient saying this is your A1C if
you bring it down by 1% your risk of I
complications goes down by X the
equivalent of that is an exist in agent
so it is going to be very critical for
investment and funding to answer that
question hasn't happened the NIH has not
seen it as its mandate the UK medical
research Council has not made it
Priority to actually invest in
developing the science to be looking at
the so-called biomarkers of Aging with
the three characteristics that I just
showed you somebody's got to do that now
industry you won't do it because you
can't patent these things I don't want
them patented why because if you patent
them you will restrict their general
adoption and if you restrict the general
adoption you won't get a standard
Benchmark by which to compare things so
I just want to make sure there is a
fourth pillar the very few people are
talking about and yet it's the key
enabler to the others the other three
you just said are not going to happen
until you get this done so that's one so
should we be investing there absolutely
my organization i' we've clearly said
listen you got to go after this and make
sure it's open source why you want the
best signs to be adopted by industry by
the regulator recognized remember and
I'm sure you know the statins didn't
take off until we had LDL
cholesterol it was the fact that we
could measure LDL cholesterol as a
predictor of vascular risk and something
that correlated with reversibility of
that risk that you started to see a
whole family of drugs what going to
happen in agent got to do that that's
number one the second is while these
exist we are free living humans exactly
to the point now how do they interact
between them is it truly a biological
intervention versus a sensor and a
device and at what point does a biologic
become a device and when does a device
become a
drug we are actually at the point with
nanotechnology and all these other new
technologies where is questioning even
our scientific definition of these
separations let alone our regulatory
definition what if it's a combination of
a device and a drug that's delivered in
a certain Tim way should that go for
regulatory approval in a as a device or
a drug I can tell you there are
challenges even our regulatory
environment because we don't know where
they
fit we're trying to reverse fit things
where bi ology doesn't naturally go
there so it's more nuanced is my point
in that and this is where we're having
to now start to say where can we unravel
some of this complexity and I totally
agree with you big data Ai and large
population sets will help us do that but
at the same time I'm a firm believer in
bringing the policy makers and
Regulators to the table this meeting
we're at today is very much including
that because we need their guidance and
their they're coming along on this
journey to help us understand so we
deliver to policy makers what they're
going to be expecting and help them
shape us and vice versa so that's where
things will
change all right so when I think about
um blood sugar a continuous glucose
monitor uh is whenever somebody asks me
you know what should I do to radically
change my health my answer is always if
you let me put a CGM on you and you let
me dictate what you eat simply by the
readings that I get on your CGM I will
change your life in in ways that they
couldn't possibly imagine fat loss being
the easiest but your joints hurting your
sleep patterns all of it is going to be
dramatically impacted by that um do you
is there anything in the literature
because I know you're going to hate the
sort of vague question is there anything
in the literature that indicates what
aging actually is or are we literally
blind at this point to the nature of
Aging I think there's a lot of
literature that tells us what the aging
process is at a cell level very very
strong literature around that a lot of
to a lesser degree but still powerful
literature that helps us understand the
aging process at tissues and organs in
various different organs to different
degrees which start you know probably
the least understand might be the brain
but in other organs we're starting to
understand that muscular scle bone you
know is there anything that the
different systems have in common there's
a few for example
sence the so-called accumulation of what
the lay literature sometimes called
Zombie cells cells that are are not
functional but haven't died and got
eliminated cence is a fairly common
phenomenon that we're seeing tiir
elongation is is a common phenomena and
observation there's a lot of question
marks whether it's something you can
intervene on you know is it elongation
isn't it the shortening of the tel but
elongation sorry is an intervention y
got it right and
so those are common which of those are
mechanistically a cause and are
reversible right sence probably are some
of the most powerful literature what
causes inessence is it the breakdown of
the methylation of the DNA itself well
so what we know is what senescent cells
are not doing is functioning normally
what we know is that they're
releasing molecules in their vicinity
so-called um you know paracrine effect
local effect of these molecules changing
the function of normal cells recruiting
and attracting inflammatory cells into
those tissues so we know they do all of
these
things why some cells become essent and
why some individuals accumulate more
ccent cells than others that has not
been fully understood on the other hand
we have knowledge that certain molecules
treatments drugs can reduce the ccent
load of tissues we also know that
reduction is associated with improved
functionality so our knowledge has
progressed all the way to understanding
that mechanism in this Pathways for ex
an example it is ready and there are
clinical trials going on in humans today
where drugs that actually reduce the
sence load or reduce the impact of that
syence actually are underway today so
that's an example what what's the um
mechanism that they're targeting are
they just trying to kill this inessence
cell or they actually making the
inessence cell perform better three
lines of interrogation or trials one is
Target and eliminate the sinin cell just
reduce the siness set load one of the
challenges there is how do you identify
very precisely a ccent cell from normal
cells and eliminate them another is to
reduce and buffer the impact of that
sinin cell right either by reducing its
function Etc the third is change the um
decline of the normal
tissues as a response to that so there's
different Pathways that are being
approached of course we have to remind
ourselves that that sence exists at
certain stages in our development for
important functions too recovering from
healings from a wound require some of
those incent Pathways so completely
blocking them and eliminating them to
zero May well be quite detrimental so
what is the sweet spot so we we know
coming back to your question there are
powerful mechanisms that we can
intervene we're learning with Precision
how to do that will that happen I'm
pretty one of the things I would say I'm
confident eventually we're going to
figure this out we're at that stage
right now it's a matter of time resource
and Investments who will figure that out
exactly of course if we knew that that's
the only company I'd be investing in
that we don't know we think about the
mtor pathway right it's a commonly
quoted pathway everybody's heard or many
people have heard of you know why don't
we just give metform to everybody and
this is you know going to slow down is
probably one of the most
widely used drugs as you know for
diabetes uh clinical trials in patients
with diabetes has shown that survival is
better in metformin treated patients
near bersel and others have shown in
multiple Publications that this is a
powerful impact it is proposed that
metformin's benefit is working through
the mtor pathway can we come at drugs
that are more
specific very encouraging data including
in humans have we proven it yet and will
everybody B benefit from it without
risks and side effects those trials some
of the trials are underway so we are at
human trial stage in a number of these
pathways are you taking met
Foreman one of the things I've learned
to do as a physician is never answer
what I do what I take really because
you're worried people will copy you or
what exactly so I you know as I said to
you I I'm an endocrinologist and one of
the commonest questions I'd get is well
if you were in my place would you take
it and I always turn around and say if I
was in your place I wouldn't be treating
myself interesting on a podcast that's a
terrible answer I will tell you that
right now uh so here's my take on this
let me know what you think um I've had a
lot of people on the show that do take
that that take a whole host of things
that are getting a lot of praise and I
have not taken any of them because I am
so paranoid about isolating compounds
and I have a very bad feeling that uh so
often something that's marked as a
Wonder cure now a year from now is oh
actually sorry that was killing you and
I'm super paranoid about that I the
fantasy thing that I hold out hope for
is AI and just the ability to
recognize patterns in an
unbelievable volume of data and right
now feels like the missing piece to me
is we we need a way better understanding
of all the complex interactions so for
instance maybe um if you are diabetic
taking um metformin is incredibly
advantageous and the the length of your
life would have been shortened were it
not for metformin but if you don't have
diabetes taking metformin now actually
shortens your life it's going to be
comple or if you're getting enough sleep
every night and you take metformin and
are diabetic then it's advantageous but
if you're not getting enough sleep blah
blah blah that you end up with a lot of
complex interactions and until we can
look at the whole data set how much
sunlight are you getting uh genetically
how well do you produce vitamin D like
there are going to be so many complex
interactions that unless you're really
looking at something that's truly n of
one you're never going to be able to
figure out what the right play is
and so for me the thing that I'm trying
to do is stay alive long enough for us
to get to what is often referred to as
escape velocity so that you're you for
every year that you live we now add more
than a year to your life expectancy and
so theoretically you are Immortal I
don't think we're ever going to actually
achieve immortality but that's probably
a different
conversation um yeah so because I'm not
a doctor I don't mind telling people uh
what I do but that yeah I would really
tell people to be wary of isolating
compounds let me respond and react um to
one of things that you said I think
which is very
powerful and it raises a dilemma we have
in society and in in the
field clearly if you have diabetes and
unless you have a
contraindication metformin in most
opinions is the first line of
drug we also know as clinicians that if
you are at risk of diabetes and have
imped glucose tolerance giving you
metformin is likely to delay the
progression to full-blown hypoglycemia
based on a threshold for blood sugar now
it's a Continuum so it's sort of a
artificial biological threshold but we
call that a threshold
right there is no drug approved by a
regulatory Agency for the prevention of
diabetes
even today there are diabetes drugs and
we are diabetes drugs that we know
reduce the progression but they not a
proof of that there are lots of reasons
for that but one is to take a drug like
metformin do I advocate that everybody
who doesn't have diabet should be taking
metformin no some people can have
significant reduction in vitamin B12
levels which has complications which can
cause harm we know your ability to build
muscle from resistance exercise I'm not
talking about big bodybuilders but
resistance which we know is a good thing
is mitigated if you take metformi so you
put on less muscle if you take Metformin
so we need to understand not only why
but what is the implication of that for
the individuals who do take metform how
do you overcome that right is it more
excise a different lifestyle so there
are always tradeoffs and to your point
we need to understand well there's a way
we can do that can do a randomized
control trial of healthy individuals
look at known age related end points and
do a met foran trial why hasn't that
been done well first of all and this is
a personal
opinion it's a drug that's very
cheap 5 10 cents a pill if that no
patent there's no branded version that
is going to sell to make money from it
and so industry for good reasons no
shareholder is going to pay a Company
CEO to go on
put lots of investments into proving the
metformin
works on the other hand government
agencies don't typically invest in doing
large clinical trials for generic
drugs it's not on their radar
screen who's going to do it and so I
think one of the questions we have to
ask ourselves in this whole field of
what I look at as repurposing drugs is
when drugs are either near off patent or
have gone have
patent can they be repurposed based on
much greater science understanding after
they've been on the market to where else
they could do that requires a couple of
things one is the funding the second is
you know drug companies compete on my
drug is more effective than yours it's a
good thing right that's the private
sector
competitiveness but it raises a question
should we ask the industry to pull all
their safety data
and so that for the common good safety
becomes essentially open
source so that as drugs are on the
market we start to understand their
safety profile because the benefit of a
drug is two sides of an equation
efficacy and risk it's both we talk a
lot about efficacy but we can actually
accelerate our understanding of safety
by a lot of this changing and sharing
data even while the Drug's on the market
and then after it's gone off the market
really pulling that how do we bring that
about you the AI on just a population
level data set will get you so far
actually studying large data sets of
people who've been treated in structured
trials will give you a whole other level
of complimentary depth in understanding
but you need to have access to more than
one trial do you see where I'm going so
those data sets and I'm not talking
about the Publications where you do some
meta analysis based on the data that's
published but actually getting at the
source data and really interrogating it
will open up all sorts of things now
that raises litigation questions risk
all of those but they're all solvable
the last piece of this data I don't
think we're going to be able to really
unlock the power of AI and large data
sets until we start to understand how do
we do that protecting privacy without
blocking access to it and so that's
going to take without blocking access to
what the data being collected right now
if I went into uh a government data set
in most developed countries and I said I
want to look at the population data set
to really understand this I cannot just
simply go in as an academic researcher I
can look at claims data if the Medicare
for example gives me access to it but
that tells me reimbursement
data claims data only tells me what was
optimized for billing
can I get into understanding actually
what the clinical record showed not what
was built and we there's lots of
literature that shows that claims data
I'm using as an example does not TR
fully represent the clinical data set do
you think people should have to um
assume it was anonymized but should
people have
to reveal their data so uh I'm imagining
a future where um we're we're wearing
ing our it's not a CGM but you're
wearing something that's monitoring your
blood levels on let's say a 100
different variables and uh we're also
tracking mortality so I can see this
person has this Blood profile and they
live this long they have these ailments
they complain about this again
anonymized but do you think people
should ought they I won't even say
legally do you think morally they ought
to give up their data you've raised the
powerful point right and I
very insightful question which is to
what extent do you balance the
individual versus the common good right
this principle allies not only to
Medical but lots of things and there are
lots of areas where we do give up our
individual rights for the common good
take a contagious infectious disease we
did this in covid right if you were
covid positive we gave up certain
choices in some countries you actually
had a passport and if it was POS
positive you could not enter certain
buildings that was we gave that up
wearing a mask was giving up our
individual choice for the common good so
the it really comes back to to what
extent are we going to ask people to do
this and to what extent so do as a
scientist do I think there's going to be
a huge significant public health and
population level benefit absolutely but
I'm not a social scientist to understand
what will it take M okay I am very wary
simply because we living in an
increasingly
divided cautious to use a very mild term
but the world is almost to the point of
lost trust almost right lost TR I say we
spilled over Y and if that's the case
then asking people to go that far I
don't know how it's going to happen in
many
countries people are going to have to be
convinced of the word you said
anonymized I think the challenge in my
mind is people don't trust that it's
Anonymous yeah and I think that they
have reason to trust it it's interesting
I was asking you a question to which I
don't know my own answer so I'm G to
think out loud uh I I am hyper American
so I don't think people should be forced
to do it but I do think that they're I
think it would be very wise of
governments to
incentivize um giving your data in a way
that is anonymized the government is
going to have to earn trust with that
because good Lord I really don't think
they've uh done a great job of earning
people's trust but that would be that
would be where I would want to lean I
would want to see people incentivized to
give that information I would want to
see that information protected as
fiercely as something can be protected
and look I'll I'll anticipate the
comments in the feed saying I'm being
naive that is almost certainly true um
but nonetheless I this to me feels
extremely consequential so I am a big
believer that if we can live forever oh
if we can live forever we
should it's very
interesting uh I'm going to make that
statement for now and then we can we can
challenge it but I I would love I really
want to live forever I will say that
that that I can say with confidence uh I
really want to live forever I do not see
any way to get there without Ai and un
obscene amount of data given my
proclivities for personal freedom I
don't see a way to get there other than
to incentivize people to give up that
data um if
I even though I know my data will be
breached if I'm honest I would give it
up if that meant I could be a
beneficiary of that
information well let me give you an
example when you voluntarily give up
that
data if you want to buy a life insurance
policy
today for which you see a perceived
benefit for your loved ones usually the
reason we buy life insurance
policy you give up your medical
record you go to a doctor you get a
physical exam and you disclose your life
habits and all the rest of it that's
expected and people do it most people
who have who are buying a life insury
expect that that's going to happen if
it's provided by your employer you get a
limited life insurance policy than you
don't but everything else you buy we're
used to seeing that and I look at that
analogy and I say that's a choice people
who buy policies make and they clearly
have a value from that can we learn from
that
behavior that's one toone benefit but
now you're talking about getting a
population but let me give you an
interesting dilemma in the Aging field
remember we talked about how to measure
your age and your biological
age if I give you a buy a life insurance
insurance policy I use a date of birth
if I get a job I provide my date of
birth and my age is taken into account
in terms of my employability not from
discrimination but retirement age and
employers look at you know how many
years can we expect this person to work
all the rest of
it let's say I could tell you that you
are 10 years older than your birth
certificate should you be required to
disc close that to your life insurance
policy should they take that into
account is that part of the actual
equation does your should your employer
know what your biological age is it
certainly affects your employability
certainly affects the actal tables so
we're going to be actually facing these
questions in the not too distant future
so what you raising is absolutely
hypothetical true I'm just saying it's
going to become a practical reality in
specific applications that we haven't
anticipated yet but just imagine the day
I can tell you that you are a aging 20
years faster than your
peer you should you disclose that to
your
family should that affect your choices
that you're making for your children
should it affect whether you should have
children or
not there's going to be questions that
technology is about to unlock enabled by
big dat and all the rest of it that we
haven't even started thinking
about yeah this is uh this is where it
gets very interesting so um I will ask
the audience to forgive me if I change
my mind down the line because I'm
definitely thinking about this for the
first time but here's how I would
approach
that uh I would certainly want to know
that information I absolutely would not
want my employer if I wasn't my own
employer I would not want them to know
that uh because it becomes far too easy
to Black Hole somebody in that nah I
just don't like that data point and so
now it becomes impossible for somebody
to get a job for instance my dad as he
was nearing retirement age dyed his hair
because he was completely gray he dyed
his hair when he went on a job hunt and
I said yeah that's a smart idea because
it
subconsciously gives the cue of
youthfulness and vitality and I think
positioning
yourself with the full recognition of
how you will be perceived is very wise
and so there is just a truth that I
think we want as the individual we want
as much control over people's perception
of us as possible and especially if they
hold some sort of consequential sway
over you however when it comes to life
insurance I'm asking you to take a bet
on me and the more that we can get to an
Actuarial certainty I think that's more
fair so from a life insurance
perspective I do think that that is
worthy of them uh or worthy for them to
require that and at my previous company
we took out keyman insurance on me for
people that don't know what that is uh
it's the assumption that if something
happened to you that would have a
material impact on the company and so
the company will sometimes take policies
out on a small handful of people um and
so I had keyman Insurance on me and I
did not enjoy that process that I felt
like a piece of meat but at the same
time I was like hey I'm
asking millions of dollars if I were to
die and so I was like yeah okay I get it
um to your point these are things that
we are going to have to sus out and I
think that people are going to need to
start forming opinions about this
stuff uh and people are going to have to
going back to that idea of societal
Norms we are going to have to start
making decisions about what this stuff
means and getting this propagated out
there as quickly as possible so now
let's really get gross for a second okay
this might go back to what you were
saying about uh you took exception to
Peter AA ranking type two diabetes or
maybe it was the way I positioned it so
I'm not speaking for Peter AA I will
speak for myself pet a friend colleague
amazing human being I love that guy more
than you know uh but the reality is two
diabetes according to Tom Bilu is a
lifestyle Choice people are choosing to
have type 2 diabetes and if they let me
control what they eat they won't have
type two diabetes uh and so I do think
that there are certain things that are
within people's control
and if you are doing a self-inflicted
wound like smoking that I will say yeah
you are going to get put in into a bad
category of life insurance of a whole
host of things your health insurance
should be more expensive if you smoke
but by my standards it should also be
more expensive if you can't modulate
your blood sugar
appropriately what say
you
so I grew up and got
trained in endocrinology and
specifically actually diabetes and
metabolic disease from the school of
thought
that advocated exactly what you said
that's how I was trained that's how I
practiced and that's how I taught I was
an academic center actually all my
practicing
career so if I reflect back and if some
of my students and former students are
listening they'll say well that's Dr
Khan that's exactly what you were
advocating what's as what's caused me to
question that do I have evidence to
counter what you've just said
indirect you mentioned The glp1 Agonist
right gp1 Agonist on the surface Cuts
your appetite and therefore you make
better choices as a neurophysiologist
biologist which I'm not a
neurophysiologist but if you ask the
neurophysiologists there Isis a much
broader question it actually does more
than that it changes the whole gut
incretin communication the biology
changes uh that's one line of evidence
that suggests this is more than just
cutting the appetite changing our
metabolism and so it becomes this
chicken and the question is the diabetes
prone person making bad choices making
them
diabetic or is it that underlying
biology that becomes this vicious cycle
I think this last round of therapeutic
interventions has really raised
questions the minds of endocrinologists
let me ask you a point of question
because you might know something I don't
but I doubt
it if you let me control what somebody
eats can we agree that if you give me a
hundred diabetic patients and remember I
control what they eat they're locked in
a room they can't touch food that I
don't give them that I can get 100% of
them to no longer be a
diabetic I can say look there's no no
question when I used to teach this
philosophy I used to say if you go to a
refugee camp uhuh or you go to
any Mass Gathering crisis after a war or
whatever people are now
hungry you'll over time find no patients
with type two
diabetes just
about that tells you is if you force
human behavior to an extreme environment
lock them up in a room of
course their biology will reset that
doesn't mean to say that they're
underlying biologies is normalize
because the minute they're out of that
environment they rebound okay that's one
the second is I'm just going to add
another variable which I find
fascinating outside my area of expertise
for fascinating
is the whole understanding or greater
understanding of our
microbiome we know if you take cly
animal experiments and this is maturing
rapidly you can take an overweight
animal
transplant those bacteria into an
underweight animal and the underweight
animal metabolism has changed and vice
versa in fact Force feeding experiments
are even more exciting because you take
a thin animal's microbiome put them in
another animal and try to force feed it
still won't gain weight and so is that
choice because there you're Force
feeding it which is sort of the hey I'm
eating even though I don't need to and
if you put these different pieces of
evidence together it starts to raise a
question where is the distinction
between choice and biology of the
underlying itself I don't think it's
that black and white anymore and I've
been really self-reflecting and asking
myself were the all the assumptions and
the Norms that I
accepted actually now being challenged
it's no different than the discussion
we've had around aging what is
inevitable versus what is the underlying
biology and the environment now the
microbiome I find even more fascinating
and simply because it then raises
questions around even the environment we
live in okay we have as modern humans
changed our environment in dramatic
ways many have had powerful public
health
impact but was there a
price what's the consequence and how do
you m again what are we learning from
that so I just I hope with nothing else
to achieve from this to raise a Seedling
of a doubt to maybe we don't have the
answer that black and
white you can reboot your life your
health even your career anything you
want all you need is discipline I can
teach you the tactics that I learned
while GR growing a billion- Dollar
business that will allow you to see your
goals through whether you want better
health stronger relationships a more
successful career any of that is
possible with the mindset and business
programs in Impact Theory University
join the thousands of students who have
already accomplished amazing things tap
now for a free trial and get started
today let me ask you a question do you
believe in Free
Will Free Will as an as a person living
in the Free World saying I'm deciding
what I want to do yes not
100% so I I will confess something which
my audience will have heard multiple
times I don't believe in Free
Will I there's just so then we're
agreeing well I'm maybe even more
Hardcore Free Will is an
illusion but I don't think there's any
way to live your life other than as if
you had Free Will and so every argument
that I make so oh God this this really
gets complicated very quickly but here's
how I look at this Free Will is an
illusion however humans still change so
the question then becomes if we don't
have free will but we are changeable now
what and so I think of myself quietly I
don't talk about this out loud very
often because it just will drive people
to distraction but I think of myself as
an algorithm I cannot help but say the
things that I'm saying right now because
of all my genetics my microbiome all the
things I've encountered all the N of one
things about me but because of that I am
compelled to put certain ideas out into
the world now the reason I think that's
incredibly powerful and the the the
notion or not even the notion the sense
of compulsion I have to put certain
ideas out into the world are because I
know that even though I don't have Free
Will and the people listening to this
don't have free will they will still be
changed by these
ideas so it becomes a question of what
ideas do we put out into the world
knowing that all of us lacking Free Will
are going to be shaped by the ideas that
we
encounter because I think it only makes
sense to act as if you had free will
then it's like okay acting as if you had
Free Will what are the ideas that are
going to shape people in the direction
that makes the most sense to shape them
into now that requires you to have a
North star there has to be something
something that you're aiming at you are
the right person to have this
conversation with because I've heard you
say a thousand times that a Leader's job
is to give people Vision you have to
know what it is that people should be
aiming at so I believe people should be
aiming to maximize human flourishing to
minimize human suffering we can get into
what human flourishing means but
basically to thrive to not be in
emotional or psychic pain to um uplift
not only yourself but other people
because if you're a sociopath and you
get joy out of punishing others that's
that does not qualify in my book you
have to be elevating other people as
well um so the reason that I harp on
Choice even though I don't think we have
free will the reason that I say that uh
being a type 2 diabetic is a choice is
because that idea is going to influence
that person's behavior and if they
believe oh it's just my underlying
biology there's nothing I can do then
they won't do the things they need to do
to reverse that problem you spoke
earlier about you have to be able to
show that this thing is the problem this
biomarker is the problem and that I've
done an intervention and I can measure
that it move me backwards in in the
right way and without that we're never
going to make progress so that's my
whole thesis with whether it's weight
loss whether it's diabetes I get it it's
way harder for some people I come from a
morbidly obese
family when you put me next to my wife
we can eat calorie for calorie the exact
same thing I will put on fat you will
literally hear me getting fatter as I'm
chewing it's crazy and my wife will just
get very hot so she'll sweat through her
clothes her sheets in the middle of the
night I won't but I will put on fat cool
so we now both have a genetic
predisposition for one way of dealing
with excess calories I put it on as
adapost tissue she uncouples heat great
now I am very emotionally traumatized by
the fact that my wife can eat basically
what whatever she wants and she doesn't
get fat and I
do but if I just lament that and I don't
make different choices then I will be
resigned to be like the rest of my
family and I will be morbidly obese but
instead because I've encountered an idea
that influences my behavior which is
that I'm in control of this now I make
different choices and I get a different
life outcome so I I'm not sure people
that fall into your Camp they tend to be
very compassionate and everything in my
research tells me that you are very
compassionate but I don't know that it
actually helps people to not say hey
you're in control make a different
decision get a different
outcome so let me let me challenge part
of it
please you've
using the framework of freedom of Will
and choice in related but to in my mind
distinct
um
situations one is you raised the
question of the mechanism and ideology
and causation of
diabetes and there my response is it is
not all choice there's clearly genetic
predisposition you take two obese
individuals the risk of diabetes is not
the same even though both are overweight
in fact if you look at identical twin
studies the concordance of type 2
diabetes and identical twins is not 100%
even though their BMI is the same
they're genetically clones they're not
100% And You could argue they've grown
up in the same environment their
behavior is nothing so there's clearly
biological difference we know that from
twin
studies so all of that suggests that the
eological discussion causitive
discussion is not a black and white
choice or not you've raised now a very
different question which is if you're
going to help some somebody intervene
who already is on the trajectory to
diabetes or has become diabetic as a
clinician do you tell them and say
listen this is not a you know this is
not your fault it's choices absolutely
not that's not the two different
situations and two different arguments
there you absolutely would say if you do
the
following this will improve your
situation and it's never as a clinician
now treating patients with diabetes for
many many years it was about you're
going to see Improvement now some
patients May dram dramatic change it was
absolutely clear that they changed their
life we've seen obese people completely
normalize their BMI something triggered
it got them going others did and then
relapsed While others made no change
continue to progress so it's a spectrum
and so as a clinician absolutely you
start with improving what you can and
then you sort of say whatever doesn't
work now what else do I have as an
option and that's a a intervention
itional approach which is different than
understanding the underlying causitive
mechanism scientifically I hope that's
clear you have to put two different
Minds on when you're a researcher versus
a clinician not the same now the other
thing that we have to ask ourselves
is that as we go
forward what is it that we need to
unravel in order to help more and more
or a higher percentage of these people
you earlier mentioned about sensors
there's going to be some people who just
basically you give them a diet
prescription and exercise and they
change their life there's others who
need a feedback
loop and that feedback loop might be
weighing
themselves feedback loop might be the
sensor there may be another feedback
loop maybe there's a subconscious
feedback loop not just a conscious one
that continues a neurological signal I'm
hypothetically that continues to change
their behavior it's a self because when
you make a conscious decision I just saw
my blood sugar go 300 I'm not going to
eat that cake that's a feedback loop
what if the feedback loop is in that
conscious so I'm just raising those are
all things that are technologically more
and more possible we're all hearing
about neuros stimulation of our
autonomic nervous system show you given
how impressively and I'm I mean this
you've read those are on the horizon too
we're starting to see neurom modulation
of the autonomic nervous system through
non-invasive stimulation sound this and
the other is that if that's a feedback
loop is that a conscious is that a
behavior change free will do you
understand where I'm going so we can't
close the door on that and all of a
sudden you're going to do a lot of
public good potentially if you can
unravel
that so I think we agree wholeheartedly
so one I've said many times I want my
Tombstone to read you're having a bi
ological experience the reason I'm
trying to get people to understand that
is everything in your life everything
everything everything is mitigated by
your biology so whether that is my wife
being able to eat more calories than I
can without putting on fat because she
turns it into heat energy whereas I turn
it into adapost tissue or something
completely different uh that's
irrelevant to me you are you as an N of
one have uh you are a certain way your
brain works a certain way your body
works a certain way your gut Works a
certain way it's going to be slightly
different than all of your other humans
you need to make sure that you tailor
something exactly to you but the reality
is that if you act as if everything were
a choice you're going to be in a much
better position so I need to do
something different to maintain my
physique than my wife
does however we both still have to do a
thing to maintain our physique and once
you let yourself off the hook and you
say oh oh well I I'm just born to be fat
right I again coming from a morbidly
obese family the number of times I've
heard that like oh they used to say this
to me all the time when I was a kid
you're going to get fat too when you get
older you're going to get fat too you're
going to get fat too you're going to get
fat too and so in my early 20s when I
started eating fat I was like well I
guess this is that like this is the
moment everybody warned me about and
then I realized that you can't eat an
entire tub of Licorice and not get fat
and I just used yeah I had many
misconceptions about uh sugar primarily
did not understand how it could become
body fat that did not make any sense to
me um and so when I said okay hold on my
life is an exact reflection of my
choices if I want a different life I
need to make different choices all of a
sudden even though my biology is
different even though I may need a
different feedback loop than somebody
else even though something may be harder
for me than somebody else the reality is
everything I do has a has this will be
interesting to see how you respond to
this it has a knowable
outcome not that we know it yet because
I don't think that we can parse the data
yet this is why I'm obsessed with AI is
it is the promise of being able to find
the patterns in an overwhelming AV
Avalanche of data and right now we all
just get paralyzed because there is so
much data and we treat it as if it is
not knowable and what I'm saying is this
is knowable human biology is know able
that we live in a determined universe
that if I had the processing power to
understand the beginning state of the
Universe I could move forward or
backwards
and I think it is only that we don't yet
have the processing power to track all
those complex interactions now I've have
heard that refuted that once you get
into I think it's known as the three
body problem once you have that third
variable there's just too much
complexity but when I hear that I just
say we just don't have the ability to
track the amount of complexity yet so
look
um I have no doubt in my mind that as
computational
capability and the power of processing
structuring processing data Etc
continues to go up and I think it'll
continue almost exponentially we're
seeing that we've witnessed it is going
to unlock connections and associations
in data that we never
imagined one word of
caution uh go back to 20 some years ago
when the Human Genome Project was
completed and the human genome had been
sequenced a lot of people celebrated
said now we will be able to identify
every cause of disease because we know
the human genome
two flaws in that one is we hadn't
sequenced the whole
genome because at that time the
computational power capability was such
that anything than smaller than about
100 base pairs or so going off memory
now was considered
noise so we actually only sequent part
of the human genome we just didn't have
the computer capability to really
sequence everything too much
noise move forward we eventually did
more recently complete the Human Genome
Project as we sequence everything the
second is we learned we had assumed that
one gene sequence equal one protein and
then we realized that there were more
proteins than Gene sequences so there
was clearly a amplification of that
variability after the genome had been
transcribed the data code read into what
the protein so there was even more
variability of multiple several fold and
then we realized that protein function
was even further Amplified in
variability because of the so-called
epome and so every time data has
unlocked our understanding of this
variability which is what you're getting
at we've realized it's actually given us
a window into how a billion years of
evolution has created diversity not just
through DNA sequence or now the types of
RNA but all of these other things are
happening what do I mean by that we will
unlock more of what is in the biological
data set so it now becomes known but it
will also very likely open up New
Frontiers which has happened every time
because we have more Precision in our
tools to understand another level of
variability which is important it's
absolutely important but I'm not of the
school of thought say now given if we
just take our existing data sets
suddenly have the computational power
this will give us all the answers it
will give a lot more answers and it will
raise questions so that we can continue
to answer them and add more and more
Precision to our understanding it's not
going to be that simple we've been
through this already in two waves that I
just gave you examples of they actually
allowed us to get to the next level of
depth likely that's what's going to
happen now I may be wrong I hope I'm
proven wrong but history tells us this
is likely to the
case now should we be doing this
absolutely for the reasons that I just
said my job as a leader you know you
quoted some of the things I've said as
that's setting the vision is to help my
organization and hopefully parts of the
field put aside for a minute that noise
that complexity and try and bring
Simplicity to what the first step in
getting to that goal is so that we
harness and focus resource cuz progress
is made through different organizations
somewhat coordinated way taking on
pieces of the puzzle and then bringing
those pieces together right we need to
be very clear as Leaders what does the
endgame look like what are we trying to
do and what's the first step to that how
do you do that how do you take an
incredibly complicated topic and boil it
down to the first
step you know I always ask my team three
fairly straightforward questions right
we we all know what our vision is right
we want to expand healthy lifespan for
the benefit of
all simple powerful statement we help
craft
it health span benefit of all okay so if
we look at that as our sort of guiding
Northstar then we can say we got to
focus on health span not just health and
disease but Health that's linked to
lifespan and we got to be able to
democratize this so that it has scale
and impact so if you put that filter on
you say all right of all the things we
could be doing the first filter is is
this really in the health span space and
can it really be democratized either
because of in technology or because of
moral reasons right you've read you know
the possibility of taking plasma from
young people and transfusing to old
people to
rejuvenate I can't ever Invasion
approving in my
organization that type of practice
simply because I don't know how to scale
it
ethically morally commercially you you
take your pick so it's not scalable but
if we could understand what the
circulating factor in young plasma is
that rejuvenates a combination of
peptides whatever they are and now
manufacture them that's scalable so it's
it's really understanding the
scalability and the path to
scalability and then asking ourselves
what is is our right to succeed I don't
like to use the word which I use in when
I was in corporate life where it was
much more appropriate I don't like to
use the the term right to
win because right to win is a very
competitive mindset which when you're in
a corporation in a business is your job
right you're winning market share you're
growing your market share you're leading
you know winning the industry whatever
right when you're trying to lead a field
convene the best Minds convene the
different disciplines and lead and make
this into a
movement you shouldn't be talking about
winning you should be talking about
leading not the same thing sometimes our
leaders talk about being winners I don't
agree in fact I gave a speech in
Washington where I said the challenge we
now have as Leaders of a country is
we're starting to talk about Winners
versus losers when we really should be
talking about our history has been about
leading the world and elevating
everybody think about we're both
Americans how did we see democratization
of us inventions agriculture transport
Communications entertainment internet
GPS cellular phone technology all got
democratized and we grew the world grew
it was leading wasn't just winning so as
a leader how do I motivate my people I
say let's talk about leading this field
what is our right to lead and what is
our right to succeed as a leader so the
the leadership I hope is clear now the
question is what does success look like
and that's where the road map comes in
what's the first step in that journey to
that Vision if I just say that is the
end point and that's it it is so
daunting most people will not take it on
probably the biggest role I have as a
CEO and you have as a CEO it's finding
the best brightest
Minds those young people to come join
you in sharing that Vision they can
always get a job question really I have
to always ask myself is why would they
work in my organization on our
challenges versus another why is there
this their
choice you don't want the people who
need who just coming because they need
the job you want the people who have 10
choices but they choose to follow you
you and you've heard me say this
leadership is not a choice by the leader
leadership is a choice that their
followers make so how do I make it their
choice that's where I give them a
stretch goal but something they can
perceive is Within Reach and that's I
think is the job of leaders clear on the
vision and then point out here's the
first step if you achieve this you will
gather the momentum to go and by the way
attract many others to come and that's
the right to lead can you attract can
you bring people together if you think
about this meeting one of the things
that we're seeing at as we're starting
to launch this meeting is the typical
the the meeting of a typical aging
geroscience Gathering it's about 150 200
people in the core biology of aging and
investing in the Aging space we've had
1,800 people register for this meeting
that's a log scale more I can't take the
credit for that that's my team's job and
they don't get all the credit the demand
must have been out there what was
missing in that void was the leadership
role of catalyzing everybody to come
together that's where the leadership and
the right to lead if we actually bring
together thousand 2,000 people at the
same venue talking about the same issue
from its different perspectives you have
got the right right to lead but others
did it for you it's very interesting um
I am of two minds of that so I will
point out Dear listeners that we are
speaking to the former member of the
commission on competitiveness or
something like that so the US Council
for competitiveness there we go so I
know in your past is a a real
understanding and recognition of the
power of
competition going back to the idea
you're having a biological experience
hum are designed to be competitive we we
are hardwired to other somebody else and
to want to win to put it in a nice way
against that person and I'm a big
believer don't try to change Behavior
try to leverage it try to figure out
what people are already doing and how do
you hijack that neuron so I know that
people want to win I know that people
are going to look at some people as in
group and some people as outgroup and
how do I leverage that so one of my
tools as a leader is hey we want to win
like we want to we want to be the best
YouTube channel on the planet we want to
make the best video games as judged by
who plays the most views the most
whatever like I want to win now I want
to do it in a healthy way I don't want
to look at my um the people that I'm
competing against as anything other than
a worthy opponent that's a big thing for
me I want to go up against people that
are worthy people that I want to see
them on their best day but I want to win
I want to beat them I want to go
head-to-head and I want to outperform
them now if I don't like I don't know if
you remember Nancy carrian but I don't
want to go hit somebody in their knee uh
so that I can beat them that is not
interesting to me I want them to thrive
so funny I've never talked about this
but I had somebody reach out to me back
channel uh about one of the biggest
podcasters in the space you haven't even
heard this and uh they were just
lamenting like oh this person's trash
like why are they getting so many
accolades they're this they're
that and that's not interesting to me
I'm like they're better than me right
now right now I want to believe that I
can outperform them on a long enough
timeline but they are currently better
than me which is why they're getting
more results than me and that lights me
up like I'm on fire for that and I
wonder because
look I love
that evolution is in a very unique
position in that you guys Exist by Royal
order not even Royal Decree or whatever
the slightly lower version Royal order
you guys are going to do this this is
like a a mandate from the King himself
cool love that and so you guys don't
have some of the
pressures but the human animal like if
if you told me you need to go solve XYZ
problem what do you need to make it
happen I'm like oh find a way to make
the people that win at that rich and
people will do it I'm not saying that
that's good I'm just saying it is it is
true and people want to claw their way
to the top
the the best the brightest the most
aggressive they want to win and do you
think that one you've had a ton of
success in your life and so it's much
easier for you at this point you've not
only do you have financial success
corporate success that looks awesome on
paper you also have marriage success
kids grandkids like you've really got
the
thing and you've managed to align
yourself with people that don't need a
financial return but do you think that
that is a scalable model or am I
positioned in a more scalable solution
where I'm like yeah just find a way to
help people get rich and and the human
Tendencies will take over you have um I
think you've made some very
profound statements uh many of which I
would not argue with but I want to give
them a slightly nuanced context by the
way the only good decision I've really
ever made was married the right woman 41
years ago everything else you just
stated about my career and personal life
is 90% hers and the rest I sort of came
along on the journey so let's just put
that on the record um there's very good
scientific
evidence that our motivations clearly
change through our life stages there's
no question when we're teenagers in our
20s we're very self-focused that's
natural why because as a species as a
young person you're trying to find your
place in the world you want a voice you
want to be heard but there's also very
clear evidence that if you want to look
at social impact
um giving forward all those things that
happens much later in your life a
because you have the capacity but also
because your thinking starts to become
much more nuanced the gray are is what
was black and white you know when you're
a young teenager early 20 things are
much more black and white you know it's
the classic saying you you know
more uh about a topic when you've read
the textbook then versus when you wrote
it okay having been both a reader and a
writer I really knew far less after I
written the textbook chapter than when I
was a reader you learn your limitations
so I think that's we've got to take that
first all I want to make sure people
understand what you're actually saying
uh because you're were talking about
this earlier that as the island of your
knowledge grows so grows the shore of
your ignorance it's called the Dunning
kuger effect which has been on full
display by the way because I know less
about this topic I am far more bold in
my predictions and my assessment of what
the future is going to be uh you know
just enough to feel like you know
everything and you don't know so much
that you realize oh my gosh I know
nothing about this topic uh yeah well so
I've I felt it personally my son was a
Graduate School of Business at Yale
every class he'd come back and tell me
all the things I was doing wrong as a
CEO that was his latest management class
okay thank you son got it next time I
teach in your class I'll make sure we
come that's normal okay so that's one
thing put that in context the other is
competition is good the desire to win
ethically morally just like you pointed
out it isn't at the negative consequence
somebody else that's good but it's a
tool we know from let's say competitive
prizes even in the uh technical field
right prizes like the SpaceX prize which
was sort of the publicly well-known
prize not only achieve technical success
but launch three or four very valuable
companies by the participants in the
race to be the first it's not bad her
whole IP patent process incentivizes
competition to be the first because you
reap the greatest benefit from that
return our whole IP structure in the
western developed world is based on that
I'm not saying compet I is bad but I'm
saying it's not the only tool it is a
tool in the armamentarium to bring
forward an have social and public and
better Humanity think about which
scientist in recent memory has had
probably saved more lives than any
scientist to come if you think about it
in life sciences it's a Nobel laurate
called Norman
borlock never made any money he wasn't
in a compy competition but he was the
the plant
biologist that invented dwarf wheat that
dwarf wheat funded by the US public
health investment he was coming out of
the Department of Agriculture and
through government tax non-patented
research developed DWF wheat most of the
benefit for which was in South Asia
because they went from one wheat crop a
year to two as a result minimum of a
billion people were saved from
starvation think of that and so A
Billion Lives saved saved not diseases
treated I can't think of very many drugs
that have ever done that if any and so
was that by competition no the
competitiveness there was to win and
succeed to unlock a natural capability
CU it was n natural breeding he wasn't
doing GM or he actually created that
breed so I give you that example to say
massive good can happen at scale through
collaboration now you use the word
leverage I love that word but I give
leverage another context in addition to
what you're saying leverage in my mind
allows you to do things primarily in two
maybe three things
first it results leverage it results
primarily from
collaboration when you collaborate you
get
leverage when you collaborate that
leverage allows you to have scale that
you as an individual couldn't and that
scale allows you to get impact at a
level that otherwise not possible so
Leverage is one of those ways and so
competition is one
lever but on its own is rarely enough
take the Space X price somebody got
through did everybody suddenly start
going to space no now you attracted
Capital
entrepreneurs material scientists people
unlocked other things and now you're
starting to see
commercialization new countries are
entering the competition for space but
it took somebody to prove it in a
competition on its own it wouldn't go
any further think of any competition
think of I gave you the example of
cellular phones competition brought SE
the private sector to give you cellular
phone technology they didn't invented
the invention came from the the US
National Lab system that actually
created the underlying
technology same with GPS geolocation is
happening because of that so it's that
public private partnership when we think
about the as a private sector we forget
all of that which was actually in the
non quote General competitive space the
covid vaccine everybody says you know
the private sector in 12 months gave us
a vaccine no it was 10 years minimum of
investment by the US tax taxpayer
primarily in academic centers and the
government labs to give you the
underlying technology that could be
rapidly applied that was the competitive
part but you forget the other 90% which
is not competitive without that there
was no competition so I just give you
that it's important as leaders that when
we think about
competitiveness we put it in the
framework of what it will
take not just one
piece well said okay we've been talking
a lot about extending people's
lives why what what is a life well-lived
what should people be doing with all
this extra time you're going to give
them I think that those is that's going
to be coming back to people being able
to do based on the choices they want to
make the loss of functionality and the
decline in health results mostly in a
person's inability to do the things that
they choose to do they make
compromises they may want to do things
that they no longer can simply because
of a decline in their health a pilot
who's flying gets grounded because their
vision is does not have the same Acuity
that they had when they 30 they lose
their
medical in a time when we probably need
three times as many pilots in the US
could say the same for air traffic
control I'm just giving an example of an
industry that's massively short right
now in training that's why so many
flights are canceled because they don't
have
crew why because we ground the pilots at
certain age they don't pass their
physical anymore they're done loss of ey
visual Acuity is not a choice that's an
aging
process being able to maintain that
allows them to choose to continue to
flying or retire most Pilots that I know
I happen to be a pilot actually will
tell you they don't want to ground
themselves they enjoy it they want to
continue to contribute took Decades of
experience to learn they're grounded so
I can give you lots of examples a
surgeon who no longer has the manual
dexterity but has amazing intellectual
experience 40 years of
experience knowing not only how to
operate but when to operate but what's
the take away that contribution is a
life well lived it's a choice
contribution in the examples I've given
you is professional another might be
contribution because I want to be around
to to teach my grandchildren things
about their Heritage my values as their
grandfather the society they live in is
contribution being able to support not
just financially enabling my children to
do things because I'm around to be able
to do things with my grandchildren is a
contribution I remember my son coming to
me uh and saying dad actually it was my
son-in-law sorry Dad uh your grandson
just went through a health and human
biology class in school and they have to
talk about human health and
reproduction I think he needs to have a
talk with
you I said when was I the designated oh
no I think you do it best and off we
went for a
walk I would think that's a very
important contribution
probably took it in my family situation
in a better context taking it from their
grandpa than their parent I play a a
role in their life it's a cherished role
so that's contribution I've given you
two ends of the spectrum both are
important if if I didn't have children I
could be mentoring other young people I
do Mentor young people who are no longer
employees of mine but I'm still their
Mentor being able to do that is very
fulfilling for for me it's nothing to do
with monetary return and they're not
doing it because they work for
me have you read man search for meaning
no whoa uh I think you will love it the
most it is one of the most influential
books on me that I've ever read written
by Victor Frankle survive the Holocaust
and he um he talked about how basically
you have to find meaning and purpose and
it's sort of the Nichi and line of he
who has a strong enough why can survive
almost anyhow it's that same idea I
think it's very much tied to
contribution when I think a lot about
fulfillment which for me is the ultimate
point I don't think that life
intrinsically has meaning I think we all
give it meaning but I think to your
point we've had a billion years of
evolution you are hardwired to um to
pursue what I call fulfillment as far as
I can tell fulfillment has a recipe and
that recipe is you have to work very
hard to gain a set of skills that allow
that you care about that allow you to
serve not only yourself but other people
and as much as I want to get away from
that need to serve other people I really
do think that that is
intrinsic the one thing I think I would
really struggle with is if I were alone
on a deserted island or I was the last
human I like to think that I would still
be able to um emotionally Thrive but I
don't know that's the one thing where if
I didn't have another person to be able
to do something for it'd be tough I
think a lot about my life and why
because I'm a very solitary person a
very solitary person but I'm nested
within the context of a very happy
marriage and so and a business for that
matter so while I don't pursue a lot of
like friendships and go hang out with
the boys and I just don't do any of that
um
um my cockiness around my ability to be
alone is still nested inside of a deep
sense
of the word that comes to mind is
obligation but in a positive way where I
there are all these people that I need
to help and do things for and show up
for and be strong for uh and I think
without that it would get dark very fast
so you've just
stated that like most vast majority of
people you're human here's why I say
that to my knowledge and there may be an
exception that I haven't come
across many
animals teach the Next
Generation all of them teach where the
Next Generation
emulates what the past the parent does
it's mimicking and eventually by
repetitive mimicking they pick up how to
do something and that's how knowledge is
passed and so if the M adult chimpanzee
cracks a nut in a certain way the baby
keeps doing it one way or another and
eventually figures out that there's a
certain way that it's done and it's
figured out humans are the only ones
that I know of that actively
teach and through that active teaching
they
instruct that instruction is hard wide
into us as a human species it's very
unique about being human it is not
simply we don't learn passively we learn
through instructions that's a human
attribute and what you're doing today is
contributing to that active teaching of
a very large following so I would
challenge your term of you are you know
quote a very individual whatever way you
want to put it because not only is the
marriage but you actually have an
extended sphere of active influence
through your current role through the
businesses you've built and even the
nutrition business Food business you
built was in part to change and actively
actively change and impart certain
enable behaviors on your customers or
consumers that What Makes Us human that
is very much the part of where almost
all of us are wired so there are some
attributes and sometimes we forget we're
actually the only active teachers in
nature let me ask if we could live
forever should
we I don't know whether we should or not
it's I honestly don't
know um
however it's the same as saying should
we treat any biological process in my
mind I come back to being a physician I
want to alleviate suffering I want to
prevent suffering aging causes probably
more suffering than any condition I know
even more so than hunger just look at
the numbers and so if we can alleviate
that and allow positive contribution to
society I'm modest enough ambitious
enough to push that envelope but modest
enough to say I don't know beyond that
what else might be possible I'm a strong
believer
in that's more of a moral question and
so science should not scientist
shouldn't derive the definition of
Morality In fact one of the first things
I did uh when we launched Evolution
remember we we had two employees is I
asked our number three employee of the
team to put together an advisory expert
advisory panel of
bioethicist first thing I did it is I
was fortunate with a long-standing
friend uh who's professor at NYU
Professor Arthur Kaplan to agree to
chairing that he's one of the for most
thinkers in the world in this space not
a biologist but he's a
bioethicist and I we approached him and
said would you put together and he
approached we both approached Professor
Julian at Oxford who's the founding
share of bioethics to join that then we
approached somebody from Asia the Middle
East and put together Global
bioethics to start to ask the question
what where is bioethics on the areas of
we're working in shouldn't be my job as
a CEO to do that and it shouldn't be a
scientist's job to Define that I think
this is where it's important to get the
people who are thinking about this these
questions including that should we
should be guided by us I'm very very
firm with the team we should be looking
at where we want to go what the
possibilities are we should always be
guided by where that line is and
remember as you know I know from your
discussions ethics is itself an evolving
science if I may use the term science
you can use the word discipline it
evolves it evolves with Society it
evolves with knowledge and evolves
because the questions being posed 20
years ago I said 50 years ago cancer was
incurable and so there was never an
ethical question of should you cure
cancer we had no
choice now it raises a different
question and by the way cancer is very
relevant to aging I just wanted to throw
that
in science has made amazing progress in
curing Childhood
Cancer most P children who got leukemia
died today more than half majority will
get
cured we have the drugs we have the
treatment lymphomas young men getting
lymphoma young women getting lymphoma
many cases are curable that's a win
however we now 30 years of treatment of
success have realized that most
survivors of cancer have accelerated
aging their bi body ages faster than
their peers who didn't get treated for
cancer so was it the underlying Cancer's
existence changing their biology were
there underlying biology different was
the consequence of the treatment we need
to answer those questions now which
really will start to open a new frontier
not only in what causes aging but when
to intervene let's say we figured this
out and we could prevent the future
accelerate aging of a young person
teenager young adult who's now being
treated for cancer should we be
intervening with quote I'm using the
general term anti-aging therapy right
after they've recovered from their
cancer to prevent that don't know yet
but we'd better start looking now
because we're going to have a lot of
successes that now are living with that
there are some genetic diseases that we
know cause can
aging Down syndrome is an example
accelerate aging they these children die
as young adults their life expectancy is
low what is it about the genetic change
of
downs that changes the aging process
it's a single chromosomal difference
right so there are now going to be
ethical questions when do you
intervene who should you intervene on so
I don't want to be the only one
answering the question it's a long
answer your question I I've thought
about this extensively and again I'm at
a point in my life and say bring in the
experts to help guide your thinking yes
I've got it as the CEO I'm accountable
for the decision at the end of the day
but it should not be in a totally top
down here let me tell you what the
answer is I don't have the answer has
the bioethics team that you put together
giv you any warnings they have raised
questions right I've I've given you an
example of plasma transfusion right
Young Blood Young Blood now let me let
me actually ask you about the young
blood I'm glad you brought that back up
so
uh I I I love the idea that somebody can
monetize their body and if somebody
wanted to sell their blood um
why does that bother you or a
bioethicist tell you why it bothers
me it comes back to your question of
Free Will and choice okay science over
the years has
evolved we lived through a period where
um through persecution genocide we were
experimenting on humans that is
atrocious go back to World War II we we
then lived through a period where we
were experimenting on African-Americans
without their
consent right we were at some point
incentivizing paying
volunteers to do allow us to do research
if they're prisoners they got extra
privileges that's a form of
payment is that free will is that choice
or is that coercion all of those were
coercion okay now if you are a poor
person
living in an inner
city and you get a financial incentive
to sell your plasma as a young man and
picking man
because to donate to somebody it is
quite
possible and the the have evidence
suggests that the person selling their
plasma is not of the so same
socioeconomic class as the person buying
if that happens is that coercion is that
free will that sounds like free will to
me why if I can sell my time why not my
blood selling your time I think most
BSIS would argue and I certainly am of
that camp is an employment where there's
a general here's a transparent value
proposition for my
time when I'm selling a part where do
you draw the line I've sold my plasma
can you sell an organ no because it's
not replenishable right that would be
where I draw the line okay so I don't
know how much plasma I can take before
I've done myself
harm okay uh I mean let's let's take a
look at this the prevalence of iron
deficiency thin blood in lower social
economic classes much higher than higher
social economic classes are those the
populations you want to be buying blood
from even if it's fre that's a different
question I'm just for me the ethics of
the situation come down not to scal
ability which was prior to asking that
question the push back I'd always heard
you give is I it's not scalable some
things just aren't going to be scalable
but at the same time I wouldn't want to
I wouldn't want to deny somebody the
ability to monetize their time energy
body whatever in the way that they want
if it is non-destructive because I get
if it's like if it were like oh man I
can't make ends meat and I want to sell
my kidney I can see how that one can go
gnarly pretty fast um and I would say
I'm not a Libertarian so I'm not about
like hey no regulation like obviously if
we were going to do this you would want
it to be something that's regulated to
make sure if there is a limit to what
people can give before it starts being
detrimental that you draw those lines
but this is this is a very interesting
moment that we're going to live through
uh anytime you're living through a hyper
transition it's going to get weird
really fast and so as we figure out what
works what doesn't it's going to be
weird uh there was a time where iPhones
were basically only for the wealthy but
then you get very good at producing them
and the cost begins to decline though
they're still pretty expens expensive
but sell phones get cheaper and cheaper
so if you look at this if there isn't a
way to monetize it in the beginning like
if we have to go from nothing to
democratized with no intermediate step I
think it's going to be extremely
difficult the place where bioethics
starts to scare me in terms of should we
all live forever going back to that
question is I think it was Max plank
that said science does not Advance one
Insight at a time it advances one
funeral at a time you're having a
biological experience the mind works in
a certain way it is terrifying to me how
hard it is for human beings to change if
I'm right and we are all roughly the
equivalent of 120 sided dice rolled and
whatever your uh 120 sides roll up like
that's just who you are and what you're
going to be like and obviously the
permutations are in the building
billions or trillions and
so the big question for me becomes all
right if I look at people that can't
change like they're crazy because my 120
sided dice came up that I'm just hyper
malleable which feels very true and I
think my brain should be studied for
science because I forget very easily in
a way that I find distressing that my
wife wishes she had uh but nonetheless
may be the key to why I'm so malleable I
I just don't get
my identity doesn't get caught up in
weird things largely because I just
don't hold on to them anyway I don't
know if it's a blessing or a curse yet
it's just how my dice have rolled and
so to me experientially it does feel
like humans can change a lot but when I
step back and look at people I worry
that Max plank is right that the only
way to refresh a population to keep
things moving and to keep progressing is
for people to die off here's how I think
Evolution has shaped us and this really
worries
me we are the ultimate adaptation
machine but the way that we are created
is such that you're hyper malleable at
the beginning of your life and you
become less so as you age and you more
or less sort of Post 25 are very rigid
not that you can't change but you
probably won't and so functionally it
becomes effectively the same
thing and so because of that even though
we are this extremely adaptable creature
we do migrate out of the age of
imprinting we become effectively a
static being and so you need to refresh
the population just by killing them off
and so even though like I really want to
see if we can get to living forever I'm
also not sure that it's
wise as I as I mentioned to you and I
think we're agreeing I don't know if
it's wise or
not but fortunately right now we don't
have to answer that question to continue
to do what we're doing right so it's the
what's the first few steps we got to
make progress agree whether I agree on
the notion that you know you have to
kill off in order to make
progress I don't agree with it as an
absolute
statement to because you have a more
profound belief in our ability to
change but societies continue to evolve
right does that me because people die
I'm not sure their ideas don't die they
evolve do we live because we're physical
beings or we live because we leave ideas
which continue to evolve themselves but
it's an evolution of those ideas not a
revolution there's some things that
challenge our norm and eventually we
look at these laws of physics are being
challenged nothing wrong with that but
it's an evolution I don't think it's a
revolution of a complete replacement
there's updated versions of our ideology
uh but are we biologically any different
today than we were as cavemen there's no
evidence for that yes there's been some
calling of the her but modern humans
biologically are are modern humans but
what has evolved has been our thinking
our morals our values those have been
multi-generationally been evolved that's
what makes us I said uniquely human so I
don't think it's a just a replacement
and you and I distinguish between our
physical presence on this world versus
the ideas we leave behind right and our
our physical presence yes we'll have a
fin night time as far as we can tell
will it be permanent I don't know okay
however let's ask
ourselves that as as we you know this
comes into the sort of our philosophy
how do how do we live on even
biologically we are
still as humans going to be living five
generations from now because our DNA
will be our genetic code right down to
that fundamental level your genetic code
is still a derivative of your ancestors
your germ cells are the oldest living
cells from multiple Generations right so
we know that is happening it's not
depends on what you define as the unit
you're coming down to that level you're
coming down to the full society and
culture level where do you want to draw
the line of us living forever I don't
think it's that simple uh and this is
where we get into sort of the the
scientific debate of you know life and
the definitions but me as a biological
organism being alive on this Earth
contributing we have been striving to
that contribution ever since medicine
came
about nothing new about it the day we
figured out we could treat somebody with
a fever and stop them from dying from a
fever by giving them bark of a tree we
were preserving life we were preserving
functionality just using more precision
and more and more powerful tools it's
just an evolution of that you know a lot
of people say to me well you know in our
grandparents generation we never heard
of cancer yeah because the life
expectancy was 50 nobody lived long
enough to get a cancer most cancers are
age related now that we're living long
enough we're getting those so now we've
uncovered challenges type two diabetes
was almost unheard of but at the same
time adults didn't live long enough to
be come have diabetes weight gain was
part of that too while age is certainly
a factor in type 2 diabetes I come back
to my very strong conviction that this
is you can track it to the increased
amount of sugar that people eat and
probably the ideology but as I said you
define diabetes as hypoglycemia yes what
do you define it
as so how did we come up with the
definition of diabetes at the you know
we we Define a cut off about 118
milligrams per Des
right it's an arbitary definition does
it mean mean depending on who you look
at is 120 118 is 116 not
diabetes 11 not diabetes the
pre-diabetes St so you're now you're
putting the pre right so you're picking
your cut
offs what we do know is if you look at
the onset of diabetes is clearly age
related it's not 100% weight related
it's a different in our body mass lean
body masses a whole variety of things
two individuals I'm Asian you're of
Caucasian descent mhm my risk of getting
type two diabetes or the same BMI is at
least twice yours as we get into the
higher bmis why is it my genetic risk
from obesity is far higher than
yours well so I'm making the same
choices yeah okay so let's dive into it
and the great news is that you will know
so much more about this you you can
correct me where I go and by the way
this is why the who has challenged the
definition based on BMI of healthy body
weight in Asians versus Caucasians
you're talking about the classification
of obesity and ideal body weight well so
ideal body weight is a very confounding
issue I'm talking specifically about the
reason I think uh diabetes is something
to pay attention to is I think sugar
will again lay not again but l terms it
will burn you alive from the inside out
you are going to glycate your tissues
it's going to get gummy things are your
ha1c levels are effectively how much
sugar is binding to your proteins that
the sugar binding to the proteins is a
problem and your cellular Machinery will
not work well because there is just a
raw biological reality of what happens
when there is an increased amount of
sugar in the system glucose and your
bloodstream you're you are now in the
same way that a senescent cell makes it
what we know is that it's not working
properly what I know when somebody has
the presence of too much uh glucose in
their system is something breaks down
now whether that's a response to the
level of insulin in your bloodstream
whether it's actually the sugar
molecules binding up in your blood I I
won't even speculate on that I will just
say it is self-evident that there is a
causal relationship between the amount
of glucose that you in like I can break
anyone no matter how resistant you are
or no matter how good you are at
handling an excess amount of sugar I can
break anybody if you let me Give Them
Enough sugar so given that that is a
very predictable way to break the
cellular Machinery I'm just saying
you're going to want to pay attention to
that and you can do this to a little kid
it might be harder to do to a little kid
but if you let me feed that kid like we
feed a goose to get Pate like it it's it
it's just too predictable of an effect
yeah so that one to me is and look I I I
have a feeling look you if if I were
mapping your personality I really have a
strong Instinct that you are hyper
compassionate and that if you put humans
on a spectrum I think any social
creature has to have people that are
hyper compassionate and has to have
people that are hyper on the personal
responsibility I'm probably somewhere in
the middle um but my thing is getting
people to understand that you're not a
bad person if you're a type two diabetic
even if it all was your choice and we
both acknowledge that it's going to be
harder for some people than others I
think we also both acknowledge a free
will is Just an Illusion anyway but
again going back to you're changeable
and so the ideas
matter you're not a bad person if you're
a type 2 diabetic I want to be very
clear about that I don't pass any moral
judgments I'm a big believer that you
cannot hate that which you love I come
from a morbidly obese Family full of
type two diabetics I don't think they're
bad people I don't think they're less
than a non-diabetic I don't think it
makes me better that I'm not a diabetic
but when my norstar is to alleviate
human
suffering you want to talk about
suffering make somebody a diabetic make
them have to amputate their toes then
their foot then their leg like that that
is a nightmare scenario also just being
inflamed all the time is
nightmarish and this is a it is a
solvable problem and it's all controlled
through diet and I hope that people hear
a message of Hope in that certainly not
condemnation certainly not you're a bad
person just hey there is a different
choice you can make that will give you a
different outcome and that outcome is a
better as judged by suffering
life I think as we talked
earlier I'm not
disagreeing all the benefits of
lifestyle choices absolutely
agree we we came back to this
question based on the fact that we gain
weight as we age what is irrefutable
evidence that for the same body weight
different populations have different
risks of getting diabetes it's very
clear you look at body mass index you
look at you know total body which
whichever variable adjust it for height
because Asians on average have a lower
height um you know in certain
populations the predisposition to
diabetes clearly is different if we look
at populations with genetic
predisposition disposition for diabetes
some populations have prevalences of
over
50% it raises the question what is it
about those populations that either
they're all making bad choices and in
some cases the risk is 60 70% of their
adults or is it a combination of things
and I think as a scientist one of the
things that we must always do is
question our assumptions to say these
exceptions to the rule May well be
questioning the rule that's where I'm
going now as you look at history and I'm
sure you've done that since you've read
a lot about sugar the last 50 years we
had two camps we had the London UK camp
which was a strong proponent of sugar is
the bad
culprit we had two camps in the US
Minnesota and Boston there were strong
proponents of fat fat is the
culprit the fat camp
won the consequence of that was actually
quite profound we had a whole two to
three decades of fat is bad we had low
fat Foods we had you know low
cholesterol this we had low that low and
it that fat was replaced in all of our
Supermarket foods with high starch high
fructose corn syrup everybody wanted a
low fat food because fat was bad okay
that came because of the argument being
now we can get into how food policy was
changed and subsidies and what the
drivers were I have spent enough time in
thinking about food policy in part of my
life uh to really dug into understand it
wasn't by surprise that the US became
the industry driver of high fructose
corn syrup wasn't by accident clear
policy changes okay then in the more
recent past we've seen a
rebalancing the sugar Camp arguments
have come forward which is all the
things you're espousing no question I've
given careful thought in actually
performing studies on how our body
responds all the way to quantifying
using radio tracers and radioactive
labels to Inhumans to
quantify what fraction of protein gets
converted to Sugar versus the different
sugars stuff I've
published given that Collective we do
get a much better picture of what you're
articulating is that however it that
itself all of that on its own doesn't
leave leave you with the Assumption of
this all or nonone it's one or the
other and all I'm saying is there's
variability amongst us and that
variability results in different
responses based on our underlying
biology being different we are not there
is not such thing in this context
metabolically a prototypical single
human being that's one of the challenges
in creating a digital you know Avatar
human to do experiments on it's likely
going to be a digital twin not a digital
human that's why and it's not just in
drug development but understanding our
biology if you go back to a paper I
published back in the '90s when I was
you know young scientist really got
interest and saying hey if we eat a lot
of protein what happens to it why
doesn't our blood sugar go up when we
eat
protein well maybe it doesn't get
converted to Sugar until we Quantified
it I published that paper 60 % of the
protein if I feed you within 8 hours of
consuming it becomes sugar
60% appears in your blood as sugar and
yet your blood sugar doesn't change and
yes your insulin goes
up why why is that different and then
you start to understand it's not just
the insulin and the sugar the glucagon
is different the other hormones are
different and so it's the net of that so
that was the start of my career I mean I
I was supposed to be a classical
physician and ended up trying to ask
when I got to be a graduate student of
the Department of Agriculture most of my
peers said why are you going from the
medical school to the agriculture school
I really wanted to understand this so I
spent a fair amount of time thinking
about
this speaking of things you've spent a
fair amount of time thinking about your
company's going to need time to get the
breakthroughs create the
Innovations what lifestyle do you want
to see people live so that they're still
around to take advantage of the
breakthroughs that are coming I think
you know um somebody asked me the the
same question in a different context
which I think is a very important
question which is why aren't we
investing more in public health right
the challenge with public health which I
think is is a powerful
tool is that there's a lot we know on
what needs to be
done which would have an impact on
individuals and
populations but the Gap is the
Translating that knowledge into
action so we need to invest a lot more
in translation of that knowledge and the
the you know almost clib example I give
is you know if knowledge was the barrier
then doctors had never smoke but we know
many Physicians I personally know that
still smoke not because it's they don't
know of course they know I know
cardiologists that smoke it's crazy they
know but they still smoke so what is it
and understanding that gap between
knowledge and behavior needs a lot of
research and interventions and so in the
absence of that so one thing is
advocating for that absolutely another
thing is figuring out and asking people
to do what we already know you and I in
some ways I would use the word are
fortunate we have bmis I'm just
estimating and I know my BMI below 2 3
your below 23 we're in the
minority and certainly in my age I inan
my 60s I'm in the minority with that BMI
and I'm being healthy in in that
BMI what why am I different I asked
myself that question why am I different
what will it take to other for others to
do because if others were doing all
those things then yes I would answer
your question I just don't know how to
get others to do that I know what they
need to
do you live it every day I just don't
know how to do it at a scale how do we
figure that and I think we have way
underinvestigated in the translational
Public Health Science and we need to
support schools of Public Health just as
we're supporting biology uh we need to
ask ourselves a question I don't know
the exact number but it' be interesting
to find out what percentage of US
research funding goes to schools of
Public Health versus other part academic
an interesting question I my guess is a
very significant minority yet they've
probably had the biggest impact on
population health and within that the
sum of individuals and probably any part
of the medical school but knowing what
you know assume you're speaking to
people that are willing to do what it
takes they are out there um what would
you advise them to do I'm guessing not
we're not smoking I've never smoked not
doing High so what should they be doing
I
think easy to state but I'll
State calories limited to keep your BMI
down so that's the quantity side I
personally
believe I eat
everything I eat everything chocolate
cake love it dessert love it fried food
love it
however infrequently abortion
control and if you make up if you're
going to indulge in one meal make it up
for the other I don't have a problem
with Indulgence the question is the
frequency okay and if you keep that in
mind
quantity enough gap between meal you
have a large meal then skip a meal and
that's what I do I have one main meal a
day I'm not intermittent fasting that's
the fad maybe I was intermitting fasting
for years but skip a
meal regular activity I have a standing
desk in my
office yeah I can sit down you know it's
the luxury of being the CEO like you hey
guys but I have a standing desk I stand
I like to hold many of my one-on-one
discussions with my executive directs
standing up they get used to it they
kind of come and talk to mm about an
issue we're both going to stand up at my
desk
it's this high so they have no choice
they're going to sit and be underneath
it they be standing so they stand after
every meeting I go take a walk of the
office little things like that good
sleep
pattern I go to bed early I don't eat
late I usually have my dinner around 600
or 7
o' yes I have a busy travel schedule I'm
typically on a flight every other week
and they're not short flights I'm going
to the UK to the US to the Middle East
sometimes Asia right long flights I get
off a
plane I look at my sleep pattern I make
sure I go for a walk out in the sunlight
everything nothing profound but it's the
some of the little things that make up
my lifestyle spend a lot of time
whenever I'm around with my
grandchildren you know people ask me how
how how come you so chilled out out you
know you have a pretty busy
Lifestyle the most calming thing I can
do is have a conversation with my little
grandchildren talk about it one of the
funniest things I heard my grandson we
were talking about space travel and I
told him in
1969 we had a school class assignment
which was to watch the landing on the
moon so we could write something about
it this was elementary
school and I was telling my grandson
about this few weeks later I heard him
talking to his friend he says you know
my grandpa was alive when they landed on
the moon this was like the most
remarkable I thought now I feel old
right but telling them that story is
part of that you know we immediately
jump to things like what can we eat to
stay
healthy part of all of our our
friendships our circles our family that
balance is part of us it's what keeps us
healthy I think it's a strong effect on
our blood pressure on our stress
levels uh we have the tools by the way
to measure stress biochemically we can
measure in your blood we can measure in
your vascular system lots of tools it
raises a question to me as a clinician
I've got actually a team figur working
on this you were talking about feedback
I said if you didn't think have to worry
about reimbursement insurance or
Medicare or UK NHS whatever if you
didn't have to worry about it and you
didn't have to worry about the cost of
it what are the best diagnostic
tools we could bring to the table today
that are available but not utilized
because either they're not rebbur or
they're too
expensive and they're scientifically
proven but the cost of getting them
through a regulatory Pro I'm not talking
about danger I'm talking about just
diagnostic tools what would they be and
if they were applied to assess function
relative to aging how would you put not
one device but the aggregate of it what
would that panel look like I don't know
the answer to that but I've got a team
actually working on that not because we
want to create IP around it but I want
to bring the best Minds from around the
world so we got opthalmologists who's
studying vascul in the eye cardiologist
studing vasculature muscular skeletal
experts biochemists exercise
physiologists using all the tools that
they do in their profession but now to
the clinic domain put it under one roof
under one clinician say what that what
does that protocol look like if you
could do that and it's not going to take
one specialty because there is actually
not a residency you can do in that
specialty you know Pioneers like petera
sort of a self-taught
but imagine now bringing all these
disciplines into a formal training at
that depth that hasn't
happened what would that look like you
know what that would be fascinating if I
could do that measurement on you today
I suspect you'd be in curious and if it
could show well my eye vasculature is at
this stage my peripheral vascular is
this stage my muscle biologist my stress
level in my endothelium is this layer
you might want to know that might change
so coming back to your question about
what could people do there's things they
could do but there's things we need to
start thinking about doing to the
profession so that those who choose now
we talked about democratizing you're
going to say well that's going to be
really expensive and yeah you and I
might be able to afford to do that but
what about the masses well do you
remember uh well I'm old enough you w't
may not be old enough you remember I
remember when antilock brakes came to
the market you literally had to have a
really expensive car because the first
anti-lock brakes came on Formula 1 cars
and they were so expensive it was never
considered a technology to be
democratized to now the cheapest Asian
car you can buy has anti-lock brakes
just about okay that was democratization
of a very expensive technology for the
reason you were saying earlier where you
were going you need to have that test
case of its
potential in a limited market and then
another part of Industry figures out out
scale it this do the same on diagnostics
now one of the question I'm curious what
is that anti-ock in the Formula 1 car
equivalent and there's lots of examples
in Formula 1 that came inertial seat
belts this and the other airbags that
could be democratized but we need the
investment to figure out what the that
prototype looks
like we haven't up until we started
these initiatives it was really the
domain of some very ultra wealthy client
clinics we want to bridge that figureing
it out not to just create commercial
scale of it and then figure out how to
democratize it but that we need to put
to Consumers and I think there's a chunk
of consumers I don't like calling them
patients patients implies they're coming
to you for a disease therapy they're
consumers just like we consume anything
else they're going to come forward and
say I want to know if that now became
part of your routine point of care
assessment on an annual basis I think
the cost would come down you could
change Behavior I would want to know my
stress level is at a much higher level
than the average and I can change
it I know that feeling this has been
amazing where can people follow you
online uh we update I say we because I
have help supporting me to I've never
got up to speed how to do but I love
post posting things on my LinkedIn page
we have a LinkedIn page for evolution
itself uh through that and uh podcast
like you know leaders like yourself uh
you're right at The Cutting Edge of this
and then there's others who sort of and
I'm not trying to um flatter you but you
know you yourself influence and then
Inspire others to do other versions of
this and you're going to see more and
more of that and if you think about the
announcements that we're making uh in
the next 48 hours and certainly in the
next 24 hours I think it'll get a lot of
attention from people I love it I'm
excited everybody speaking of things you
should be excited about if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care peace if you enjoyed this episode
be sure to check out this other
conversation with Peter diamandis you're
living through an inflection point in
human evolution between Tech like AI
Quantum Computing and biotech the next
decade will bring about more dramatic
change than the last 100 or even 200
years
combined